feat: Rework domain-manager standard (#879)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-0302-v2-domain-manager-role.md

---
title: Domain Manager adoption notes
type: Standard
track: IAM
status: Draft
replaces: scs-0302-v1-domain-manager-role.md
---

## Introduction

After the domain manager persona has been implemented certain issues in the
standard adoption and verification started being raised by CSPs:

- Not every CSP is using domains to separate customers.

- CSP may rely on the Identity federation in which case it is impossible or is
prohibited to manage identities on OpenStack side (OpenStack is a service
provider and not an identity provider).

- CSP may customize authorization policies in a different way so that domain
manager can not be implemented by simply reusing the upstream implementation.

As such simple enforcement of the Domain Manager persona can not be achieved.

This standard clarifies base standard and splits requirements into recommended
and mandatory to provide better granularity while still giving guidance with
the goal to provide a smooth user experience for the end users.

> Requiring customer to use CSP specific APIs to manage identity data is
> contradicting with the idea of certification as such. It hinders customers from

Reviewer: Somehow in my brain this sentence works better with standardization (since that comes before certification, which is just the attestation of successful standardization):

```suggestion
Requiring customer to use CSP specific APIs to manage identity data is
contradicting the idea of standardization  as such. It hinders customers from
```

having a smooth user experience across different cloud providers forcing them
to adapt their management strategies on such clouds. Moreover it represent a
lock-in what is contradicting with the idea of SovereignCloudStack.

### Mandatory capabilities

#### Assign roles to users/group on projects/domain

One of the main initial concerns of the Domain Manager was the ability of the
customer to manage user permissions in a self-service manner. OpenStack
Keystone provides an easy possibility to smoothly integrate role assignments
with arbitrary external systems in a transparent way (a role assignment backend
plugin can be provided to persist assignments in any external system). As such
this capability MUST be supported by the CSP using OpenStack APIs or role

> assignments.

Author: It's technically a 100-200 lines of python code depending on the desired integration. I repeat - I (user) come for OpenStack UX, why can't I have it? When CSP is not capable to integrate OpenStack into their business system without disrupting the designed flows they simply should not do this at all.

#### Project creation

Another important requirement was to provide self-service capability for
customers to create projects as desired without requesting CSP support. This

> capability MUST be available using native cloud APIs.

Reviewer 2: This will lead to problems and effort for providers who have external processes on projects.

Author: I do not think that somebody is preventing user to create K8 namespace from kubernetes directly. Why should all of a sudden this is then causing problems on OpenStack? In my eyes this is just a wrong integration. As an OpenStack user (on a daily basis) I am incredibly frustrated by inability to create projects using native OpenStack API. I come to the CSP for OpenStack UX and I can't use it.
OpenStack emits audit messages for all major events (projects creation/deletion as well). Proper integration would be catching such events and allocating resources in the "external systems" as necessary without influencing UX

Author: As a user spending 50% of my day in OpenStack managing complex infrastructures always have the necessity to manage projects on my own without exiting boundaries of OpenStack. I (with my customer hat on) am always incredibly frustrated and angry when I can't do this.
Purpose of the standard is to serve customer and not to protect OEM, otherwise we would all still live now in the world with 40 different chargers for mobile phones.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps it would be useful if other CSPs can give some insights here, for us we don't really have customers that feel the way about this as you do. Only from "don't need" to "nice to have"

#### Project editing

Customer must be able to activate or deactivate project access without
requesting CSP support. This capability provides possibility to temporarily

> disable users to authorize into certain project by modifying`enabled` property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disable users to authorize into certain project by modifying `enabled` property
```

of the project. Further control of the project name, description, options and

> tags MUST be provided to the customer using native Keystone API.

Reviewer 2: Same.

Reviewer 3: This will also cause a stale state between Keystone and the CSPs source of truth, unless we build even more CSP-specific glue for backsynching this.

I see why this is important, but realistically and according to various certification requirements, this needs to be implemented at a CSP level. Let's say Bob gets their account disabled `enabled=False` in Keystone. Bob can still open a support case with the CSP to destroy resources. Having disabled the account gives some false security to whoever did that.

Author: I strongly disagree here. If the process is working like that - it is wrong. I call your support, request deletion of a server in your account and they just do it? CSP MUST implement validation of support requests. Imagine I am a customer bringing my own LDAP with 1000 users. Does that automatically mean I can not manage them on my side? Or does that mean that any of those 1000 users can request whatever they want?

Reviewer 3: As a CSP we handle authorisation of user accounts in systems other than keystone. I'd argue that this is common practise pretty much everywhere. When a support case comes in, the support system shows what the requestor is authorised do to.

We can and will not change this. It is part of multiple certifications. But discussing business processes should be beyond the scope of SCS anyways.

:::info

Project deletion using Keystone API is not mandatory since CSP may have certain
expectations on the resources cleanup. This requirement is described in detail
in a dedicated chapter.

:::

### Recommended capabilities

Relying on the Identity federation conceptually changes ways of identity
resource management. This makes it impossible to fulfill them as MUST
requirements. This chapter describes remaining capabilities of the initial
Domain Manager as SHOULD implement.

#### Domains usage

It is strongly suggested to rely on the Domain concept of Keystone to implement
multi-tenancy.

> Usage of domains by itself allows to implement form of self-service management
> by the customer. Only identity resources are owned by domains (with projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usage of domains by itself allows to implement a form of self-service management
by the customer. Only identity resources are owned by domains (with projects
```

> being also identity resources). Other services use projects to for resources
> isolation. They do not need to be domain aware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
being also identity resources). Other services use projects for resources
isolation. They do not need to be domain aware.
```

Using domains allows implementing [domain
limits](https://docs.openstack.org/keystone/latest/admin/unified-limits.html#domain-limits)
which allow to set a global resources limit for the customer. Without domains
specific limits artificial control of the overall customer consumption must be
implemented.

#### User management

User management (creation, activation, deactivation, deletion) SHOULD be
possible using OpenStack APIs.

When an external IdP is being used (IdP federation) there is still an

> expectation that local users may be required by customers. As such creation of
> users (pre-creating federated users or regular local users) within customer
> domain SHOULD me possible. Keystone does not allow certain operations on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expectation that local users may be required by customers. As such, creation of
users (pre-creating federated users or regular local users) within customer
domain SHOULD be possible. Keystone does not allow certain operations on
```

federated users (i.e. password change, MFA, name) as such allowing customers to
manage users using OpenStack APIs should not conflict with any additional
requirements.

Security requirements on the customer side or on the CSP side to only allow
federated users to consume platform services was used as the limitating factor
forcing degrading of the capability requirement.

#### Group management

Management of groups SHOULD be possible using OpenStack APIs.

> In case of federated Identities there it is possible that groups on the IdP
> side do not match groups on the cloud provider side. In addition to that there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of federated Identities the possibility exists that groups on the IdP
side do not match groups on the cloud provider side. In addition to that there
```

might be a need to combine federated and local users. This would only be
possible when groups are managed by the OpenStack.

It is advised to keep user groups as mapped entities between external systems
of CSP and Keystone. Upon user login (or using SCIM) user group relation may be
synchronized between both platforms.

#### Project deletion

As described above project deletion may be implemented differently by CSPs.
There are few ways of achieving that:

- Forbid project deletion when resources (i.e. VMs) are still provisioned
inside of those projects. This scenario assumes that the customer is
responsible for cleaning projects before their deletion.

- Automatically purge all project resources by the CSP when project deletion
request is received. In this scenario CSP is implementing custom functionality
to delete all resources before deleting the project.

- Leave orphaned resources. In this scenario project is being deleted by the API

> with custom cleanup procedures being responsible for dropping orphant resources.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
with custom cleanup procedures being responsible for dropping orphaned resources.
```
Typo.

Leaving orphaned resources MAY NOT be allowed.

Forbidding project deletion making customer responsible for the cleanup SHOULD
be preferred since it allows preventing the accidental deletion of the
resources. Supplementary methods for purging project resources MAY be offered by

> the CSP.

Reviewer 4: To avoid a race condition (be it with checking for existing resources to reject project deletion if there are still resources or be it with deleting the resources automatically), we would need a two phase commit:
(a) mark the project as read-only, so no new resources can be created
(b) do the checks/cleanups
(c) finally remove the project
